HSS/LMS: Side Channel Analysis (#153)
sehlen-bsi/botan-docs: docs/audit_report/src/side_channels/01_01_lms.rst

"""""
LMS
"""""

Analysed variants:

- Truncated(SHA-256,192),HW(5,1)

For the analysis of LMS, a utility was written that calls the functions to be analysed in a similar way to the Botan CLI.
The following call is used to create the signature:

.. code-block:: cpp

    auto sk = Botan::HSS_LMS_PrivateKey(rng, mode);

    Botan::PK_Signer sig(sk, rng, "");
    signature = sig.sign_message(message, rng);

**Leak: hash chain calculation**

During the analysis, a control flow leak was found in the function `process()` [BOTAN_LMS_PROCESS]_.
This function is part of the Winternitz One-Time Signature (WOTS) procedure.
The WOTS procedure is based on the use of hash chains with a defined length.
Using the private WOTS key, the initial values of the hash chain are calculated.
These values are the private keys of the hash chains.

> The public keys of these hash chains are calculated by calculating the hash chain to the defined end.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The public keys of these hash chains are obtained by computing the hash chain to the defined end.
```

To create a signature, the hash of a message and an additional checksum are split into individual parts, so-called chunks.
Each chunk is signed by a hash chain.
The number of steps in the hash chain calculation corresponds to the value of the respective chunk.
The control flow leak indicates these differences in execution.

.. code-block:: cpp

    void process(HashFunction& hash,
             uint16_t chain_idx,
             uint8_t start,
             uint8_t end,
             std::span<const uint8_t> in,
             std::span<uint8_t> out) {
       BOTAN_ARG_CHECK(start <= end, "Start value is bigger than end value");

       if(start == end) {
          copy_into(out, in);
          return;
       }
       m_gen.set_i(chain_idx);

       // Unroll first iteration of the loop
       m_gen.set_j(start++);
       m_gen.gen(out, hash, in);

       for(uint8_t j = start; j < end; ++j) {
          m_gen.set_j(j);
          m_gen.gen(out, hash, out);
       }
    }

The variables *start* and *end* specify the start and the end index in the hash chain calculation.
Depending on the value of the message hash, the *process()* routine is executed differently.

> This is the basis of the observed control flow leak.

Reviewer: It would be nice if this could be explained a bit better.
In particular: does this only leak information about the message or what is leaked here. The remaining part of the section seems to say that the leak is unproblematic but, honestly, I don't get the details here.
